[Music]
have you heard the one about Thomas
Jefferson and the Louisiana territory
Thomas Jefferson author of the
Declaration of Independence was not a
fan of the new constitution presented in
he was very worried that the
Constitution gave too much power to the
new national government and not enough
power to the States an issue known as
big government Jefferson only
reluctantly agreed to support it when
his friend James Madison promised to
propose a bill of rights after it was
ratified but Jefferson's fears about big
government did not go away
for example Secretary of the Treasury
Alexander Hamilton proposed a National
Bank in 1790 and Jefferson knew there
was no provision in the Constitution to
permit such a thing Hamilton claimed
some sort of implied powers mumbo jumbo
sure it wasn't written in the
Constitution but the Constitution
implied that it could be done
Jefferson wasn't buying it nonetheless
the bank was established by Hamilton and
President Washington when Jefferson was
sworn in as president 1801 he pledged to
reduce the size and scope of the
national government but of course things
didn't go exactly as he had planned
Spain secretly transferred the Louisiana
territory to France right beneath
Jefferson's nose when Congress found out
they quickly began discussions with
France to buy a piece of the territory
along the Mississippi River for about
two million dollars but there was one
little problem
Jefferson knew there was no provision in
the Constitution to buy foreign
territory so what was a strict
constructionist to do first he tried to
get an amendment to the Constitution
passed that would expressly permit the
purchase but Congress wasn't willing to
do it then without permission the US
negotiators in France cut a deal for all
of the territory for a cool fifteen
million dollars that new land
the size of the nation now Jefferson was
really stuck he knew that the territory
would be a great acquisition for the
country providing lots of new land for
farmers and other settlers but how could
he can to tional II justify it in the
end
Jefferson turned to the argument used by
his old foe Alexander Hamilton he
claimed that the power to purchase the
territory is implied in the
Constitution's treaty making power this
was the exact argument that he had
mocked openly a decade before so it must
have crushed his pride to have to use it
but more importantly he may have
committed the biggest big government
play ever how ironic is it that one of
the biggest opponents of big government
doubled the size of the young country
and did so while openly questioning its
constitutionality at fifteen million
dollars which is about three cents an
acre it has been called by many the
greatest real estate deal in the history
of the United States
you